What will you do
in the face of Satan’s attack?
Well, that’s a relevant question
for all of us here
because without exception,
we’re under a vicious, intense attack.
But the question is,
As the battle intensifies
in our individual cases,
will we be able to stand our ground,
bravely fight,
and come off victorious?
Well, obviously your desire
is to be victorious—isn’t it?—
or you wouldn’t be attending
this special program.
But we need more than just the desire
if we’re going to ensure victory.
In fact, to win any battle,
we need accurate knowledge of three things:
We need to know our enemy,
know his strategy,
and know what we have to defend ourselves.
Now, first,
let’s talk about our enemy, Satan.
He is no ordinary foe.
Jehovah educates us
regarding this enemy we’re fighting.
For one thing,
he’s a premeditative murderer.
Look at what he did to Job’s attendants
—slaughtered them with marauder bands.
Others were consumed with fire.
Look at what he did to Job’s ten children.
He simultaneously murdered
all ten of them with a violent windstorm.
Yes, he’s a premeditative murderer.
He wants to murder into everlasting death
every one of us here.
Now, on top of this,
he is highly intelligent.
As one brother said,
“He may be evil, wicked, murderous,
but he’s not stupid.”
He’s highly intelligent.
In fact, think about this:
The fact that he was once in the truth
makes him more intelligent in a sense,
or (we could say) clever,
because he has knowledge
of having been in the truth.
John 8:44 says:
“He did not stand fast in the truth.”
But he was in the truth.
Now, to illustrate
how this makes him more dangerous,
think about a few of the false brothers
during World War II
who left the truth
and joined the Nazis
in persecuting the brothers in the truth.
They had knowledge
of who were taking the lead.
They knew where they lived.
They knew the strategy
that was being utilized.
They were more dangerous, weren’t they?
Well, it’s the same with Satan.
Second Corinthians 11:14 says:
“Satan . . . keeps disguising himself
as an angel of light.”
Now, it’s very easy for him
to pretend to be what he used to be.
So that makes him more dangerous.
Now, open up, please,
to Revelation chapter 12
—a very familiar scripture.
But let’s reason on this to help us further
not to underestimate, or underrate, our enemy
—Revelation 12:7.
“And war broke out in heaven:
“Michael and his angels battled
with the dragon,
“and the dragon and its angels battled
“but they did not prevail,
“nor was a place found for them
any longer in heaven.
“So down the great dragon was hurled,
“the original serpent,
the one called Devil and Satan,
“who is misleading
the entire inhabited earth;
“he was hurled down to the earth,
and his angels were hurled down with him.”
And then look at verse 12:
“On this account be glad,
“you heavens and you who reside in them!
“Woe for the earth and for the sea,
“because the Devil has come down to you,
“having great anger,
knowing that he has a short period of time.”
Now, you notice, he’s not just mad.
He has “great anger.”
Why is he so angry?
Well, for one thing,
after he lost the war in heaven,
he wasn’t merely asked to leave heaven
and then he quietly left.
We read that “he was hurled” out of heaven,
and that denotes thrown with great force.
So that undoubtedly added to his great anger.
But also think about this:
The tremendous reduction
of his sphere of movement
adds undoubtedly to his great anger.
Before being cast out of heaven,
apparently he had access
to both the vast, vast physical
and spiritual heavens,
but now he’s confined to the vicinity
of this little, tiny earth.
And if you think about it,
not only does that make him mad,
it makes him more dangerous, doesn’t it?
Before being cast out of heaven,
undoubtedly he would try to turn away
the angels part of the time
and he would try to turn away humans.
He was divided in his attention.
But now we have his undivided attention,
don’t we?
So that’s bad for us,
and that makes him dangerous.
Here’s another illustration
about the increasing of the danger.
I’d like you to imagine
that all of the Mafia members,
all of the drug cartel members,
and all of the terrorists
on the entire planet Earth were gathered up
and were confined to New York City,
the city limits,
and you lived there too.
Now, can you imagine
the escalation of crime and evil
that would take place there?
Additionally, we read that he’s mad and angry
because he knows his time is short.
Now, if that was true back around 1914,
what about today, over 100 years later?
He knows his expiration date is almost here.
So you add it all up,
and his anger
is truly, really white hot,
you could say.
And he has hordes of demon helpers.
That makes him more dangerous too.
Do you think it would be possible
for a demon to block
one of Jehovah’s good angels?
Well, be careful how you answer that.
Daniel 10:13
talks about the demon prince of Persia
blocking Jehovah’s good angel “for 21 days.”
Now, how was that possible?
Well, we don’t know for sure,
but perhaps the demon prince
before becoming a demon
had been a cherub or a seraph.
And maybe the one sent on the assignment
was a messenger angel.
Of course,
Michael came to help the good angel,
and he was able to get past that demon.
But that scripture and others
help us not to underestimate the demons.
We can’t underestimate
“the ruler of the demons”
nor these demons
who work under his supervision.
So adding it up,
we find that Satan
is a premeditative murderer.
He’s highly intelligent.
He has great anger
because of his great reduction
of sphere of movement
and because of his expiration of time,
and he has hordes of demon helpers.
Now, Jehovah has given us
all this information,
not just to fill up pages in the Bible
but so that we are determined
to recognize the enemy we’re up against
and that we’re determined
to fight even harder
so that we can be victorious.
But now let’s take a little time
to get to know our enemy’s strategy.
Again, thanks to Jehovah,
we’re not in the dark, are we?
Second Corinthians 2:11 says
“so that we may not be overreached by Satan,
for we are not ignorant of his designs.”
Why are we not ignorant?
Well, very kindly Jehovah has exposed
the full spectrum of Satan’s designs,
his strategies, his maneuvers.
He’s exposed all of them
in his Word, the Bible.
Now that’s very kind of Jehovah
—isn’t it?—
very kind of Jehovah.
Even though the Bible was written
(the completion of it)
over 1,900 years ago,
Jehovah, let’s say 100 years
after the Bible had been written,
didn’t come to the realization:
‘Oh, no! I forgot to put one
of Satan’s tricks in the Bible.
Oh, no! My people won’t be ready for it.’
No, Jehovah has exposed every one of them
in his Word, the Bible.
Well, what two basic categories
does God’s Word indicate
that Satan’s strategies can be divided into?
Well, first, we have the frontal attack.
Now, that’s characterized
by bannings, imprisonments,
threats, and acts of violence,
such as were used on our brothers
in Malawi in the past
and are being used today
in Russia on our brothers.
And you don’t have to scratch
your head and say,
‘I wonder if I’m being persecuted.’
When you have the frontal attack,
it’s obvious, isn’t it?
It’s clear—the frontal attack.
Has this proved to be
Satan’s most successful method of attack?
No, not really.
Here’s just one experience
out of thousands that could be related
to substantiate this point.
Now, this experience centers
around a 29-year-old brother
named August Dickmann.
Now, you probably remember this experience.
He was put
in Sachsenhausen concentration camp
in 1937,
but then three days
after World War II began
in 1939,
he was ordered to sign
his military induction slip.
Of course, he refused to do that.
Now, the camp commander was furious.
So he got permission from Himmler,
the head of the SS guard,
to publicly execute August
in front of all the camp inmates.
And he arranged a special assembly
after he got this permission,
and he had Jehovah’s Witnesses
right down in front,
where they would get the full impact
of the execution of our dear brother.
Well, after he was executed,
all the other inmates were dismissed,
but Jehovah’s Witnesses had to stay.
And with great enthusiasm,
the camp commander
said to the Witnesses there,
he said,
“Who is now ready to sign the declaration?”
Well, not one
of more than 400 Witnesses responded.
But then two stepped forward.
No, not to sign
but to ask that their signatures
given about a year earlier
be annulled.
What a slap in Satan’s face!
And that really illustrates
the poor success rate
of this frontal attack, see,
and many other experiences could be related.
And it’s certainly proving true
of our brothers in Russia today,
including elderly ones.
The frontal attack
has a very poor success rate
—a slap in Satan’s face.
But, now,
what is the second category of strategy
that sadly has claimed
many spiritual victims?
Let’s go to Ephesians chapter 6,
and here we can identify in verse 11
this second category.
“Put on the complete suit of armor from God
“so that you may be able to stand firm
against the crafty acts of the Devil.”
So notice that
—“crafty,” sneaky, underhanded, devious.
Satan uses these,
and he’s brought down many
away from Jehovah and out of the truth.
These “crafty acts” remind me
of an illustration years ago
in one of our publications of a soldier
who was looking in the distance
for the enemy to come over the horizon.
He was looking for the frontal attack,
but he wasn’t looking
in the rocks down by his feet.
There was a poisonous snake lurking.
And that powerfully made the point:
You have to watch,
yes, for the frontal attack
but especially for the snake-in-the-rocks
attacks of the Devil
that can really bring you down
without you realizing what has happened.
But Jehovah assures us that we can succeed
in triumphing over both
of these categories of attacks.
In fact, Psalm 91:13 is a beautiful thought.
It says, and Jehovah assures:
“You will trample underfoot
“the maned lion
and  the big snake.”
And the Insight  book explains
that apparently in that scripture,
“the maned lion”
represents the frontal attack,
the open attacks of Satan,
whereas “the big snake” represents
the sneaky, crafty acts of the Devil.
But Jehovah says
“you will trample” both of them “underfoot.”
So we can be successful over both of them.
Well, what are some
of these snakelike, crafty acts?
Well, let’s just discuss two examples.
Here’s one: materialism.
Now, this has brought down
many elders, ministerial servants,
pioneers, publishers
—a very successful crafty act of the Devil.
It’s no coincidence that this world
is powerfully geared to promote materialism.
Relentless advertising messages
are designed to indoctrinate deeply
the idea that acquiring
abundant material possessions
and acquiring happiness
are inseparably linked
and directly proportional.
That’s really the message the world gives.
Isn’t that true?
And if we’re not careful,
we can begin to think
like these advertising messages
want us to think
—that we’re a poor, poor loser
if we don’t acquire abundant material things.
So, what can happen?
We could get sucked
into this little by little.
We buy one item.
No problem, we can handle that.
We buy something else.
Well, now we need
to work a little bit of overtime
to make the payments.
We keep buying.
Now we need to take a second job.
Little by little,
we’re missing meetings, service,
and there’s less time for personal study
—“the more important things.”
And little by little
(we could call Satan the god of gradualism),
he’ll take us away from Jehovah
by means of materialism.
Well, here’s one more example:
bad association.
At 1 Corinthians 15:33, Jehovah says:
“Do not be misled.
Bad associations spoil useful habits.”
We might try to mislead ourselves:
‘Oh, I can handle it; I’m strong enough.
Maybe I’ll even bring this person
into the truth.’
Or others may try to mislead us.
But Jehovah says: “Do not be misled.”
And then he gives the terrible consequences.
Think of this illustration:
If you lock a man and a skunk in a closet,
when they come out,
will the skunk smell like the man
or will the man smell like the skunk?
Well, you know the answer,
and Jehovah knows it works the same way
with bad association.
Well, those are just two examples
of crafty acts of the Devil.
There are many others.
They’re all exposed, though,
as we said before.
Jehovah kindly has done that.
But now think of this.
Think of this illustration:
If you’re walking in darkness
with a loving friend
and he shines a flashlight on a trap
that is right in front of you,
does the light of that flashlight
remove the trap?
No, it just shows you where it is.
Now it’s up to us to go around the trap.
Isn’t that true?
How foolish to go ahead and step in that trap
that our friend has illuminated!
Well, Jehovah is the Friend
in that illustration.
But we have to do our part, don’t we?
Well, we’ve thus far discussed our evil enemy
and his sinister strategy,
which Jehovah has exposed.
But, now,
what do we have to defend ourselves?
One major component of our defenses
is knowledge, see,
what we’ve just discussed:
knowing our enemy, knowing his strategy,
and then wisely utilizing that knowledge
provides a real protection for us.
There’s a saying,
“To be forewarned
is to be forearmed.”
Similarly, Proverbs 4:5, 6 says in part:
“Acquire wisdom,
acquire understanding . . . ,
and it will protect you.”
But now, additionally,
we have our spiritual armor.
Ephesians 6:12, 13 says in part:
“We have a struggle . . .
“against the wicked spirit forces
in the heavenly places.
“For this reason
“take up
the complete suit of armor from God,
“so that you may be able to resist . . .
and . . . stand firm.”
We’ve had some beautiful
Watchtower  study articles recently
about each of those six pieces of that armor
and how we can put on
and keep on each piece of the armor.
Without our armor,
we are defenseless.
We’d be like a soldier
on a raging battlefield,
dressed only in his underwear.
How long do you think he would survive?
Minutes, if that long.
And not only do we need the armor,
but we need every piece of the armor.
And that’s what Ephesians 6:13 says,
“the complete suit of armor.”
One piece of armor missing could be tragic.
Now, let’s illustrate this.
Let’s say a soldier forgets
to put on his bootlike sandals.
He goes out into this raging battlefield,
and he steps on a long, sharp thorn
just as he’s attacked by an enemy soldier.
Who is going to win?
Well, it’s obvious.
We need every piece of the armor.
Additionally, an indispensable part
of our defense system
is Jehovah’s holy spirit.
At Zechariah 4:6, the thought is made:
“‘Not by a military force, nor by power,
but by my spirit,’
says Jehovah of armies.”
See, we don’t fight this battle
in our own strength.
We have to have Jehovah’s holy spirit.
And if we have holy spirit
and we’re empowered by it,
if we think about it,
there is no breaking point to our integrity.
You probably have heard the illustration
of the straw that broke the camel’s back.
And literally with a camel,
you could keep piling
more and more weight,
so that finally you could put so much weight
(just a little more weight)
that you could break its back.
Satan could do that to us
—couldn’t he?—
if we were on our own.
But Jehovah knows when we’ve done our part
and we’ve gone as far
as our imperfect flesh will take us,
and then he steps in
and makes up any deficit.
Satan piles more;
Jehovah makes up for the shortfall.
Jehovah makes us equal to that challenge.
And since Jehovah is the Almighty,
there is literally no breaking point
to our integrity.
In fact,
one brother living in a banned country
refused to violate his Christian neutrality,
so he was stripped naked,
forced to lie facedown,
and ruthlessly beaten for six hours
on his back and his legs.
Spectators fainted
because it was so ruthless.
But yet,
here’s what that brother said sometime later.
He said:
“Regardless of the amount
“of insulting and beatings that we received,
“a few seconds would pass
“and we would not feel anything more
“even though the beatings continued.
We were feeling
that Jehovah God was always with us.”
Well, there we have three aspects
of our defense system.
There are others.
But we discussed
that we have God-given knowledge:
We know our enemy,
we know his strategy,
and we know what we have
to defend ourselves.
But then we have our spiritual armor,
and we have Jehovah’s holy spirit.
If we do our part,
unquestionably Jehovah always does his part.
And this combination
is going to be unconquerable.
So as the battle intensifies
in our individual cases,
we’re not going to have to turn
and cowardly flee.
We’ll be able to stand our ground.
We’ll be able to bravely fight,
and with Jehovah’s help,
we will come off completely victorious
in the face of Satan’s attack.